# Automated Testing of Cockpit

This directory contains automated tests for Cockpit, and the support
files for them.

  **********************************************************************
  *                                                                    *
  *  This testsuite is being phased out.  Don't do any new work here.  *
  *  The new one is in ../test-avocado.                                *
  *                                                                    *
  **********************************************************************

To run the tests, you need to install the following packages on
Fedora:

  # yum install trickle npm python-libguestfs qemu mock qemu-kvm python \
         curl libvirt-client openssl rpmdevtools \
         rpm-build krb5-workstation python-lxml

Testing requires phantomjs globally on the system, not just inside the cockpit package.

  # npm -g install phantomjs

## Quick list of tools

For setting up the host:

vm-prep,     for creating the test network etc.

For managing test machines:

vm-create,   for creating test machine images from scratch.
vm-save,     for saving a known good test machine image for fast reuse.
vm-download, for downloading test machine images.
vm-reset,    for starting over from a clean slate.
vm-install,  for installing RPMs into a test machine image.

For debugging:

vm-run,      for running a test machine image.
vm-copy,     for copying files into a running test machine.
vm-sh,       for executing commands in a running test machine.

The test suite itself:

testsuite-prepare,   for preparing everything so that tests can run.
check-verify,        for running all tests.
check-*,             for running selected tests.

## Configuration

You can set these environment variables to configure the test suite:

  TEST_OS    The OS to run the tests in.  Currently, "fedora-21",
             "fedora-22" and "rhel-7" are supported, with "fedora-22"
             as the default.
             Note on "rhel-7": The installation routine expects subscription
             credentials to be present on the host:
             ~/.rhel/login and ~/.rhel/pass, which will be copied to the guest.
             Without these, the system can't be registered and the runtime
             dependencies of cockpit won't be installed.

  TEST_ARCH  The machine architecture to use.  Currently, the default
             and only supported value is "x86_64".

  TEST_DATA  Where to find the archived test machine images.  The
             default is the same directory that this README file is in.

  TEST_JOBS  How many tests to run in parallel.  The default is 1.
             (This only affects check-verify and you need to install
             GNU parallel.)

## Quick start

First, you need to run ./testsuite-prepare.  This will download
necessary images, compile cockpit, install the result, and set up some
virtual networking.  It might ask for the sudo password in order to
setup the network.

Please make sure that mock does not issue a warning. You may have to add
your user to the mock system group.

  $ ./testsuite-prepare

Then you can run some tests:

  $ ./check-dbus

To run all tests in parallel, run check-verify like this:

  $ TEST_JOBS=4 ./check-verify

## Test machines and their images

The code under test is executed in one or more dedicated virtual
machines, called the "test machines".  Fresh test machines are started
for each test.

A test machine runs a "test machine image".  Such a test machine image
contains the root filesystem that is booted inside the virtual
machine.  A running test machine can write to its root filesystem, of
course, but these changes are (usually) not propagated back to its
image.  Thus, you can run multiple test machines from the same image,
at the same time or one after the other, and each test machine starts
with a clean state.

A test machine image is created with vm-create, like so:

  $ ./vm-create -v -f cockpit

This starts from a magic base tarball, makes some magic modifications
to it, brings it up-to-date with respect to the upstream package
repositories, and sets it up for the indicated flavor.  The magic base
tarballs is looked for in $TEST_DATA, is currently lovingly made by
hand, and changes almost never.

You can find some magic base tarballs here:

    http://files.cockpit-project.org/testdata

The image will be created in the "./run" directory.

There can be more than one test machine image.  For example, you might
want to test a scenario where Cockpit on one machine talks to FreeIPA
on another, and you want those two machines to use different images.

This is handled by passing the "--flavor" / "-f" option to vm-create
and other scripts that work with test machine images.  Currently, two
flavors are available:

  "cockpit" -- The basic image for running Cockpit.  This is the
               default.

  "ipa"     -- A FreeIPA server.

To define a new flavor, create a script called "FLAVOR.setup" in this
directory.  Then, calling "vm-create -f FLAVOR ARGS..." will run
"FLAVOR.setup ARGS..." inside the virtual machine.

By default, launching a test machine from an image will dynamically
assign it a 'random' MAC, which results in DHCP assigning it a random
IP address.  This means that you can launch multiple test machines
from a single image, maybe to use multiple machines inside a single
test case, or to run multiple test cases in parallel.

If you want a fixed MAC for a given flavor, you can create the
"FLAVOR.conf" file in this directory with a content like this:

    { 'mac': "F0" }

Whenever a test machine of the flavor is launched, it will receive
this MAC, and you can thus only run one of them at any given time.

If you specify only two hex-digits with the "mac" configuration
option, a default prefix will be used.  The suffices "F0", "F1", "F2",
"F3", and "F4" will be assigned the fixed IP addresses 10.111.111.100
to 10.111.111.104.  DNS will resolve "f0.cockpit.lan",
"f1.cockpit.lan", etc to these addresses.

A test machine image can be saved for later use with vm-save:

  $ ./vm-save [-f FLAVOR]

This will simply copy the image to $TEST_DATA/images/.

To use saved images effectively, you need to understand what happens
when a test machine is started: If there is a suitable image in
"./run", it will be used.  Otherwise, a new image is created by using
an image in $TEST_DATA/images as the 'backing file'.

The ./vm-reset program will remove the ./run directory.

The idea is that creating a fresh image with a backing file is _much_
faster than vm-create.  One typically uses vm-create not more often
than once a day, but each test suite run should start from clean test
machine images.

Also, a saved image serves as a point of reference since using it will
isolate you from changes in the package repositories that are used by
vm-create.

A test machine image created by vm-create doesn't contain any Cockpit
code in it yet.  You can build and install the currently checked out
working copy of Cockpit like this:

  $ ./vm-install $(../tools/make-rpms)

This will modify the test machine image in ./run, but will not modify
the saved version in $TEST_DATA/images.

A typical sequence of steps would thus be the following:

  $ ./vm-create ...       # Create a fresh image in ./run
  $ ./vm-save             # Save it for future use

  $ ./vm-reset            # Start over
  $ ./vm-install ...      # Install code to test
  $ ./check-...           # Run some tests

  $ ./vm-reset            # Start over
  $ ./vm-install ...      # Install code to test
  $ ./check-...           # Run some tests

  etc.

## Running tests

Once you have a test machine image that contains the version of
Cockpit that you want to test, you can run tests by picking a program
and just executing it:

  $ ./check-dbus

## Debugging tests

If you pass the "-s" ("sit on failure") option to a test program, it
will pause when a failure occurs so that you can log into the test
machine and investigate the problem.

You can log into a running test-machine with "vm-sh".

You can also put calls to sit() into the tests themselves to stop them
at strategic places.

You can use the "--vm-start-hook" option to execute an arbitrary shell
command after a test machine has been booted but before the test
begins.

That way, you can run a test cleanly while still being able to make
quick changes, such as adding debugging output to JavaScript.

The environment variable TEST_MACHINE is set to the identifier of the
machine that has just been booted.

For example, one might run a full "make install DESTDIR=..." and copy
the resulting installation directory to the test machine.  This can
maybe be done by a script like this:

    inst=/var/tmp/INST
    f20 rm -rf "$inst"
    f20 make-top -k install DESTDIR="$inst"
    f20 tar -C "$inst" -cf - . | ./vm-sh --machine $TEST_MACHINE 'cd / && cpio -idu'

The hypthetical "f20" command executes a command in the build
environment.

## Guidelines for writing tests

It is OK for a test to destroy the test machine OS installation, or
otherwise modify it without cleaning up.  For example, it is OK to
remove all of /etc just to see what happens.  The next test will get a
pristine test machine.

A fast running test suite is more important than independent,
small test cases.

Thus, it is OK for tests to be long.  Starting the test machine is so
slow that we should run as many checks within a single session as make
sense.

Still, within a long test, try to have independent sections, where
each section returns the machine to more or less the state that it was
in before the section.  This makes it easier to run these sections
ad-hoc when doing incremental development.
